---
title: k3s
description: description
published: false
date: 2025-01-01
categories: 
tags: devops k8s  
image:
  path: /assets/img/headers/image.webp
  lqip: data:image/webp;base64,
  alt: image
---


K3s provides an installation script that is a convenient way to install it as a service on systemd or openrc based systems. This script is available at https://get.k3s.io. To install K3s using this method, just run:
```shell
curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | sh -
```

After running this installation:

The K3s service will be configured to automatically restart after node reboots or if the process crashes or is killed

A kubeconfig file will be written to /etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml

A single-node server installation is a fully-functional Kubernetes cluster, including all the datastore, control-plane, kubelet, and container runtime components necessary to host workload pods. It is not necessary to add additional server or agents nodes, but you may want to do so to add additional capacity or redundancy to your cluster.


Cluster Access
The kubeconfig file stored at `/etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml` is used to configure access to the Kubernetes cluster. If you have installed upstream Kubernetes command line tools such as `kubectl` or `helm` you will need to configure them with the correct `kubeconfig` path. This can be done by either exporting the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable or by invoking the `--kubeconfig` command line flag. Refer to the examples below for details.

Leverage the KUBECONFIG environment variable:
```shell
export KUBECONFIG=/etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml
kubectl get pods --all-namespaces
helm ls --all-namespaces
```

Or specify the location of the kubeconfig file in the command:
```shell
kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml get pods --all-namespaces
helm --kubeconfig /etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml ls --all-namespaces
```

Accessing the Cluster from Outside with kubectl
Copy `/etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml` on your machine located outside the cluster as `~/.kube/config`. Then replace the value of the server field with the `IP or name of your K3s server`.
kubectl can now manage your K3s cluster.



install kubectl

Download the latest release with the command  
```shell
curl -LO "https://dl.k8s.io/release/$(curl -L -s https://dl.k8s.io/release/stable.txt)/bin/linux/amd64/kubectl"
```
Install kubectl
```shell
sudo install -o root -g root -m 0755 kubectl /usr/local/bin/kubectl
```


```shell
kubectl version --client
```

install helm
```shell
curl https://baltocdn.com/helm/signing.asc | gpg --dearmor | sudo tee /usr/share/keyrings/helm.gpg > /dev/null
sudo apt-get install apt-transport-https --yes
echo "deb [arch=$(dpkg --print-architecture) signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/helm.gpg] https://baltocdn.com/helm/stable/debian/ all main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/helm-stable-debian.list
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install helm
```